docs/develop: the compiler chapter (#2)
nanjekyejoannah/micropython: docs/develop/core.rst

.. _coreruntime:

The MicroPython Core Runtime
============================

> This chapter details the core components that makeup MicroPython including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter details the core components of MicroPython including
```

the compiler, Memory Management, known optimizations, core and
dynamic models and a summary of what happens when you run a MicroPython
program.

For purposes of this chapter, the location of focus is the ``py``
directory.

The compiler
------------

> The compilation process in MicroPython involves the following couple of steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compilation process in MicroPython involves the following steps:
```

* The lexer converts the stream of text that makes up a MicroPython program into tokens.
* The parser then converts the tokens into abstract syntax (parse tree).
* Then bytecode or native code is emitted based on the parse tree.

Changing the grammar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> MicroPython's grammar is based on the old `CPython grammar <https://docs.python.org/3.5/reference/grammar.html>`_

Reviewer: I'm not sure 'old' is the right word here - it actually has some support for newer features (like the walrus operator and type hints). Perhaps it would be best to just:
```suggestion
MicroPython's grammar is based on the `CPython grammar <https://docs.python.org/3.5/reference/grammar.html>`_
```

and is defined in ``py/grammar.h``. This grammar is what is used to parse MicroPython source files.

There are two functions you need to know to define a grammar rule i.e ``DEF_RULE`` or ``DEF_RULE_NC``.

> ``DEF_RULE`` allows you to define a rule with a compile function. 

Reviewer: Perhaps consider adding "We'll cover ``DEF_RULE_NC`` shortly".

.. code-block:: c

   DEF_RULE(add1_stmt, c(add1_stmt), and(2), tok(KW_ADD))

The second argument ``c(add1_stmt)`` is the corresponding compile function that should be implemented
in ``py/compile.c`` for this rule. 

The third important argument can be ``or`` or ``and``. This specifies the number of nodes associated with a statement. 
For example, in this case, our ``add1`` statement is similar to ADD1 in assembly language. It takes one numeric argument
and adds 1 to it. Therefore, the ``add1_stmt`` has two nodes associated with it. One for the statement itself 
i.e ``add1`` and the other for its argument.

Finally, the fourth argument in this example is the token associated with the rule. This token should be
defined in the lexer by editing ``py/lexer.h``.

Defining the same rule without a compile function is achieved by using the ``DEF_RULE_NC`` function
and omitting the compile function argument:

.. code-block:: c

   DEF_RULE_NC(add1_stmt, and(2), tok(KW_ADD))

The remaining arguments take on the same meaning.

.. note::
   The function ``DEF_RULE`` or ``DEF_RULE_NC`` takes other arguments. For an indepth understanding

>    on what parameters are supported, see ``py/grammar.h``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The function ``DEF_RULE`` or ``DEF_RULE_NC`` takes other arguments. For an in-depth understanding
   of supported parameters, see ``py/grammar.h``.
```

Changing the lexer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Every rule defined in the grammar should have a token associated with it and defined in ``py/lexer.h``. 
Add this token by editing the ``_mp_token_kind_t`` enum:

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 12

   typedef enum _mp_token_kind_t {
    ...
    ...
    P_TOKEN_KW_OR,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_PASS,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_RAISE,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_RETURN,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_TRY,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_WHILE,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_WITH,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_YIELD,
    MP_TOKEN_KW_ADD1,
   } mp_token_kind_t;

Since, we are adding a keyword, edit ``py/lexer.c`` to add the new keyword:

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 12

   STATIC const char *const tok_kw[] = {
    "False",
    "None",
    "True",
    "__debug__",
    "and",
    "as",
    "assert",

>     #if MICROPY_PY_ASYNC_AWAIT

Reviewer: It seems like we should remove the preprocessor directives?

    "async",
    "await",
    #endif
    "break",
    "class",
    "continue",
    "def",
    "del",
    "elif",
    "else",
    "except",
    "finally",
    "for",
    "from",
    "global",
    "if",
    "import",
    "in",
    "is",
    "lambda",
    "nonlocal",
    "not",
    "or",
    "pass",
    "raise",
    "return",
    "try",
    "while",
    "with",
    "yield",

>     "add1",

Reviewer: I think we need to make it clearer that 'add1' is an example of adding a keyword.

   };

Notice the keyword is named depending on what you want it to be. For consistency, maintain the
naming standard accordingly.

.. note::
   The order of these keywords in ``py/lexer.h`` should match the order of tokens in the enum
   defined in ``py/lexer.h``.

Parsing
~~~~~~~~

The parser takes the tokens produced by the lexer converting them to an abstract syntax tree(AST) or

> parse tree. The implementation for the parser is defined in ``py/parse.c``. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parser takes the tokens produced by the lexer and converts them to an abstract syntax tree (AST) or
*parse tree*. The implementation for the parser is defined in ``py/parse.c``. 
```

> The parser also maintains a table of constants for use in different aspects parsing, similar to what a `symbol 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parser also maintains a table of constants for use in different aspects of parsing, similar to what a `symbol 
```

table <https://steemit.com/programming/@drifter1/writing-a-simple-compiler-on-my-own-symbol-table-basic-structure>`_ 
does.

Several optimizations like `constant folding <http://compileroptimizations.com/category/constant_folding.htm>`_ 
on integers for all operations i.e logical, binary, unary, etc, optimizing enhancements on parenthesis

> around expressions are performed during this phase and optimizations on strings.

Reviewer: I found this a bit difficult to read; maybe split it into a couple of sentences?

> Notable to the parser is that at this stage, some lonely statements like *docstrings* are discarded and not 
> accessible to the compiler. Even optimizations like `string interning <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_interning>`_ are 
> not applied to *docstrings*.

Reviewer: "Notable" and "lonely" don't quite work in this paragraph, perhaps it might help to simplify to something like:

```suggestion
It's worth noting that *docstrings* are discarded and not 
accessible to the compiler. Even optimizations like `string interning <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_interning>`_ are 
not applied to *docstrings*.
```

Compiler passes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Like many compilers, MicroPython compiles all code to MicroPython bytecode or native code for
execution by the virtual machine. The functionality that achieves this is implemented in``py/compile.c``.
The most relevant method you should know 
about is ``mp_raw_code_t *mp_compile_to_raw_code(mp_parse_tree_t *parse_tree, qstr source_file, bool is_repl)``. 

> The compiler compiles the code in several passes.

Reviewer: It might make sense to clearly identify how many passes there are and number them so it's clear. At times I found it difficult to track which passes you were referring to (especially the sentence on line 240; "The other two passes...").

In the first pass, the compiler computes the stack sizes in scope:

.. code-block:: c

   // compile pass 1
   comp->emit = emit_bc;
   #if MICROPY_EMIT_NATIVE
   comp->emit_method_table = &emit_bc_method_table;
   #endif
   uint max_num_labels = 0;
   for (scope_t *s = comp->scope_head; s != NULL && comp->compile_error == MP_OBJ_NULL; s = s->next) {
        #if MICROPY_EMIT_INLINE_ASM
        if (s->emit_options == MP_EMIT_OPT_ASM) {
            compile_scope_inline_asm(comp, s, MP_PASS_SCOPE);
        } else
        #endif
        {
            compile_scope(comp, s, MP_PASS_SCOPE);

            // Check if any implicitly declared variables should be closed over
            for (size_t i = 0; i < s->id_info_len; ++i) {
                id_info_t *id = &s->id_info[i];
                if (id->kind == ID_INFO_KIND_GLOBAL_IMPLICIT) {
                    scope_check_to_close_over(s, id);
                }
            }
        }
   ..
   }

> Other computations regarding scopes and identifiers are computed but also at this point the number of labels that
> will be required in the emitted code is determined and set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other computations regarding scopes and identifiers are computed and also at this point the number of labels that
will be required in the emitted code is determined and set.
```
